---
title: Creating a chrooted sftp-only ssh user
published_date: "2020-01-30 20:42:03 +0000"
layout: blog_post.liquid
is_draft: false
data:
  last_updated_date: 2021-03-21
  published_date: 2020-01-30
---
I wanted to set up an easy and secure way to use the storage on my server as a personal
"cloud storage". I also wanted it to be isolated from everything else on the server.
To do this, I used a chrooted sftp-only ssh user. There are probably other ways
to do something similar, but I went for this option because I didn't need to install
additional packages.

### Prerequisites
You only need a Linux server with ssh. I'm using Ubuntu Server 18.04 LTS with OpenSSH,
but this should work on any modern Linux distribution.

### Setting up our user
We're going to need a separate user on our server. I'll be calling mine `sftponly`, but
you can use whichever name you want.

<pre>
$ sudo adduser --disabled-password --shell /usr/sbin/nologin sftponly
</pre>

This creates a user without shell access and without a password. It can only login using
ssh key-based authentication.

This is also the moment to add your ssh public key to the `authorized_keys` file of the
newly created user:
<pre>
$ mkdir /home/sftponly/.ssh
$ echo "YOUR PUBLIC KEY HERE" >> /home/sftponly/.ssh/authorized_keys
</pre>

We also create a path for the chroot:
<pre>
$ mkdir -p /srv/sftp/chroot
</pre>

Make sure this directory is owned by root and not writeable by any other group or user:
<pre>
$ ll /srv/sftp
drwxr-xr-x  3 root     root     4096 jan 29 21:46 chroot
</pre>

This is required by the `ChrootDirectory` option for sshd that we will be using. From
the `sshd_config(5)` man page:
<pre>
ChrootDirectory
   Specifies the pathname of a directory to chroot(2) to after authentication.  At session
   startup <b>sshd(8) checks that all components of the pathname are root-owned directories
   which are not writable by any other user or group.</b>  After the chroot, sshd(8) changes the
   working directory to the user's home directory.  Arguments to ChrootDirectory accept the
   tokens described in the TOKENS section.
</pre>

If sshd gives any `bad ownership or modes for chroot directory` errors, double check that
you have set up the ownership correctly according to the `sshd_config(5)`. Note that you
may also get `broken pipe` errors if the permissions are incorrect.

### Editing our sshd configuration

Next we have to edit our `sshd_config`. Find the line
<pre>
Subsystem sftp /usr/lib/openssh/sftp-server
</pre>
and change it into
<pre>
Subsystem sftp internal-sftp
</pre>

This makes it possible to use the `ChrootDirectory` option without any further configuration.

And then we add the last part of our configuration. For our specific user, we set up the
chroot directory and force sftp. For security, TCP forwarding and ssh agent forwarding
is also disabled.
<pre>
Match User sftponly
    ChrootDirectory /srv/sftp/chroot
    ForceCommand internal-sftp
    AllowTcpForwarding no
    AllowAgentForwarding no
</pre>

If you want the user to only have read-only access, use <code>ForceCommand internal-sftp -R</code> instead.

### Results

Now if we just try to ssh we'll be kindly reminded that we can only use sftp:
<pre>
$ ssh sftponly@example.com
This service allows sftp connections only.
</pre>

And sftp obviously works like charm:
<pre>
$ sftp sftponly@example.com
Connected to example.com
sftp>
</pre>

And we can see that we're working in a chroot:
<pre>
sftp> pwd
Remote working directory: /
</pre>

